docs/components/rule.md, before:

# Rule

_**NOTE:** The rule component is experimental since it has conceptual tradeoffs that might not be favorable for most use cases. It is recommended to keep deploying rules to the relevant Prometheus servers._

_The rule component should in particular not be used to circumvent solving rule deployment properly at the configuration management level._

The rule component evaluates Prometheus recording and alerting rules against random query nodes in its cluster. Rule results are written back to disk in the Prometheus 2.0 storage format. Rule nodes at the same time participate in the cluster themselves as source store nodes and upload their generated TSDB blocks to an object store.

The data of each rule node can be labeled to satisfy the clusters labeling scheme. High-availability pairs can be run in parallel and should be distinguished by the designated replica label, just like regular Prometheus servers.

```
$ thanos rule \
    --data-dir          "/path/to/data" \
    --eval-interval     "30s" \
    --rule-file         "/path/to/rules/*.rules.yaml" \
    --alert.query-url   "http://0.0.0.0:9090" \
    --alertmanagers.url "alert.thanos.io" \
    --cluster.peers     "thanos-cluster.example.org" \
    --objstore.config-file "bucket.yml"
```

The content of `bucket.yml`:

```yaml
type: GCS
config:
  bucket: example-bucket
```

As rule nodes outsource query processing to query nodes, they should generally experience little load. If necessary, functional sharding can be applied by splitting up the sets of rules between HA pairs.
Rules are processed with deduplicated data according to the replica label configured on query nodes.

## Deployment

## Flags

[embedmd]:# (flags/rule.txt $)
```$
usage: thanos rule [<flags>]

ruler evaluating Prometheus rules against given Query nodes, exposing Store API
and storing old blocks in bucket

Flags:
  -h, --help                     Show context-sensitive help (also try
                                 --help-long and --help-man).
      --version                  Show application version.
      --log.level=info           Log filtering level.
      --log.format=logfmt        Log format to use.
      --gcloudtrace.project=GCLOUDTRACE.PROJECT  
                                 GCP project to send Google Cloud Trace tracings
                                 to. If empty, tracing will be disabled.
      --gcloudtrace.sample-factor=1  
                                 How often we send traces (1/<sample-factor>).
                                 If 0 no trace will be sent periodically, unless
                                 forced by baggage item. See
                                 `pkg/tracing/tracing.go` for details.
      --grpc-address="0.0.0.0:10901"  
                                 Listen ip:port address for gRPC endpoints
                                 (StoreAPI). Make sure this address is routable
                                 from other components if you use gossip,
                                 'grpc-advertise-address' is empty and you
                                 require cross-node connection.
      --grpc-advertise-address=GRPC-ADVERTISE-ADDRESS  
                                 Explicit (external) host:port address to
                                 advertise for gRPC StoreAPI in gossip cluster.
                                 If empty, 'grpc-address' will be used.
      --grpc-server-tls-cert=""  TLS Certificate for gRPC server, leave blank to
                                 disable TLS
      --grpc-server-tls-key=""   TLS Key for the gRPC server, leave blank to
                                 disable TLS
      --grpc-server-tls-client-ca=""  
                                 TLS CA to verify clients against. If no client
                                 CA is specified, there is no client
                                 verification on server side. (tls.NoClientCert)
      --http-address="0.0.0.0:10902"  
                                 Listen host:port for HTTP endpoints.
      --cluster.address="0.0.0.0:10900"  
                                 Listen ip:port address for gossip cluster.
      --cluster.advertise-address=CLUSTER.ADVERTISE-ADDRESS  
                                 Explicit (external) ip:port address to
                                 advertise for gossip in gossip cluster. Used
                                 internally for membership only.
      --cluster.peers=CLUSTER.PEERS ...  
                                 Initial peers to join the cluster. It can be
                                 either <ip:port>, or <domain:port>. A lookup
                                 resolution is done only at the startup.
      --cluster.gossip-interval=<gossip interval>  
                                 Interval between sending gossip messages. By
                                 lowering this value (more frequent) gossip
                                 messages are propagated across the cluster more
                                 quickly at the expense of increased bandwidth.
                                 Default is used from a specified network-type.
      --cluster.pushpull-interval=<push-pull interval>  
                                 Interval for gossip state syncs. Setting this
                                 interval lower (more frequent) will increase
                                 convergence speeds across larger clusters at
                                 the expense of increased bandwidth usage.
                                 Default is used from a specified network-type.
      --cluster.refresh-interval=1m  
                                 Interval for membership to refresh
                                 cluster.peers state, 0 disables refresh.
      --cluster.secret-key=CLUSTER.SECRET-KEY  
                                 Initial secret key to encrypt cluster gossip.
                                 Can be one of AES-128, AES-192, or AES-256 in
                                 hexadecimal format.
      --cluster.network-type=lan  
                                 Network type with predefined peers
                                 configurations. Sets of configurations
                                 accounting the latency differences between
                                 network types: local, lan, wan.
      --cluster.disable          If true gossip will be disabled and no cluster
                                 related server will be started.
      --label=<name>="<value>" ...  
                                 Labels to be applied to all generated metrics
                                 (repeated).
      --data-dir="data/"         data directory
      --rule-file=rules/ ...     Rule files that should be used by rule manager.
                                 Can be in glob format (repeated).
      --eval-interval=30s        The default evaluation interval to use.
      --tsdb.block-duration=2h   Block duration for TSDB block.
      --tsdb.retention=48h       Block retention time on local disk.
      --alertmanagers.url=ALERTMANAGERS.URL ...  
                                 Alertmanager URLs to push firing alerts to. The
                                 scheme may be prefixed with 'dns+' or 'dnssrv+'
                                 to detect Alertmanager IPs through respective
                                 DNS lookups. The port defaults to 9093 or the
                                 SRV record's value. The URL path is used as a
                                 prefix for the regular Alertmanager API path.
      --alert.query-url=ALERT.QUERY-URL  
                                 The external Thanos Query URL that would be set
                                 in all alerts 'Source' field
      --objstore.config-file=<bucket.config-yaml-path>  
                                 Path to YAML file that contains object store
                                 configuration.
      --objstore.config=<bucket.config-yaml>  
                                 Alternative to 'objstore.config-file' flag.
                                 Object store configuration in YAML.
      --query=<query> ...        Addresses of statically configured query API
                                 servers (repeatable). The scheme may be
                                 prefixed with 'dns+' or 'dnssrv+' to detect
                                 query API servers through respective DNS
                                 lookups.
      --query.sd-files=<path> ...  
                                 Path to file that contain addresses of query
                                 peers. The path can be a glob pattern
                                 (repeatable).
      --query.sd-interval=5m     Refresh interval to re-read file SD files.
                                 (used as a fallback)
      --query.sd-dns-interval=30s  
                                 Interval between DNS resolutions.

```

Commit message:

ruler: Handle multiple alertmanagers the same as Prometheus does.
Signed-off-by: Bartek Plotka <bwplotka@gmail.com>

docs/components/rule.md, after:

# Rule

_**NOTE:** The rule component is experimental since it has conceptual tradeoffs that might not be favorable for most use cases. It is recommended to keep deploying rules to the relevant Prometheus servers._

_The rule component should in particular not be used to circumvent solving rule deployment properly at the configuration management level._

The rule component evaluates Prometheus recording and alerting rules against random query nodes in its cluster. Rule results are written back to disk in the Prometheus 2.0 storage format. Rule nodes at the same time participate in the cluster themselves as source store nodes and upload their generated TSDB blocks to an object store.

The data of each rule node can be labeled to satisfy the clusters labeling scheme. High-availability pairs can be run in parallel and should be distinguished by the designated replica label, just like regular Prometheus servers.

```
$ thanos rule \
    --data-dir          "/path/to/data" \
    --eval-interval     "30s" \
    --rule-file         "/path/to/rules/*.rules.yaml" \
    --alert.query-url   "http://0.0.0.0:9090" \
    --alertmanagers.url "alert.thanos.io" \
    --cluster.peers     "thanos-cluster.example.org" \
    --objstore.config-file "bucket.yml"
```

The content of `bucket.yml`:

```yaml
type: GCS
config:
  bucket: example-bucket
```

As rule nodes outsource query processing to query nodes, they should generally experience little load. If necessary, functional sharding can be applied by splitting up the sets of rules between HA pairs.
Rules are processed with deduplicated data according to the replica label configured on query nodes.

## Deployment

## Flags

[embedmd]:# (flags/rule.txt $)
```$
usage: thanos rule [<flags>]

ruler evaluating Prometheus rules against given Query nodes, exposing Store API
and storing old blocks in bucket

Flags:
  -h, --help                     Show context-sensitive help (also try
                                 --help-long and --help-man).
      --version                  Show application version.
      --log.level=info           Log filtering level.
      --log.format=logfmt        Log format to use.
      --gcloudtrace.project=GCLOUDTRACE.PROJECT  
                                 GCP project to send Google Cloud Trace tracings
                                 to. If empty, tracing will be disabled.
      --gcloudtrace.sample-factor=1  
                                 How often we send traces (1/<sample-factor>).
                                 If 0 no trace will be sent periodically, unless
                                 forced by baggage item. See
                                 `pkg/tracing/tracing.go` for details.
      --grpc-address="0.0.0.0:10901"  
                                 Listen ip:port address for gRPC endpoints
                                 (StoreAPI). Make sure this address is routable
                                 from other components if you use gossip,
                                 'grpc-advertise-address' is empty and you
                                 require cross-node connection.
      --grpc-advertise-address=GRPC-ADVERTISE-ADDRESS  
                                 Explicit (external) host:port address to
                                 advertise for gRPC StoreAPI in gossip cluster.
                                 If empty, 'grpc-address' will be used.
      --grpc-server-tls-cert=""  TLS Certificate for gRPC server, leave blank to
                                 disable TLS
      --grpc-server-tls-key=""   TLS Key for the gRPC server, leave blank to
                                 disable TLS
      --grpc-server-tls-client-ca=""  
                                 TLS CA to verify clients against. If no client
                                 CA is specified, there is no client
                                 verification on server side. (tls.NoClientCert)
      --http-address="0.0.0.0:10902"  
                                 Listen host:port for HTTP endpoints.
      --cluster.address="0.0.0.0:10900"  
                                 Listen ip:port address for gossip cluster.
      --cluster.advertise-address=CLUSTER.ADVERTISE-ADDRESS  
                                 Explicit (external) ip:port address to
                                 advertise for gossip in gossip cluster. Used
                                 internally for membership only.
      --cluster.peers=CLUSTER.PEERS ...  
                                 Initial peers to join the cluster. It can be
                                 either <ip:port>, or <domain:port>. A lookup
                                 resolution is done only at the startup.
      --cluster.gossip-interval=<gossip interval>  
                                 Interval between sending gossip messages. By
                                 lowering this value (more frequent) gossip
                                 messages are propagated across the cluster more
                                 quickly at the expense of increased bandwidth.
                                 Default is used from a specified network-type.
      --cluster.pushpull-interval=<push-pull interval>  
                                 Interval for gossip state syncs. Setting this
                                 interval lower (more frequent) will increase
                                 convergence speeds across larger clusters at
                                 the expense of increased bandwidth usage.
                                 Default is used from a specified network-type.
      --cluster.refresh-interval=1m  
                                 Interval for membership to refresh
                                 cluster.peers state, 0 disables refresh.
      --cluster.secret-key=CLUSTER.SECRET-KEY  
                                 Initial secret key to encrypt cluster gossip.
                                 Can be one of AES-128, AES-192, or AES-256 in
                                 hexadecimal format.
      --cluster.network-type=lan  
                                 Network type with predefined peers
                                 configurations. Sets of configurations
                                 accounting the latency differences between
                                 network types: local, lan, wan.
      --cluster.disable          If true gossip will be disabled and no cluster
                                 related server will be started.
      --label=<name>="<value>" ...  
                                 Labels to be applied to all generated metrics
                                 (repeated).
      --data-dir="data/"         data directory
      --rule-file=rules/ ...     Rule files that should be used by rule manager.
                                 Can be in glob format (repeated).
      --eval-interval=30s        The default evaluation interval to use.
      --tsdb.block-duration=2h   Block duration for TSDB block.
      --tsdb.retention=48h       Block retention time on local disk.
      --alertmanagers.url=ALERTMANAGERS.URL ...  
                                 Alertmanager URLs to push firing alerts to. The
                                 scheme may be prefixed with 'dns+' or 'dnssrv+'
                                 to detect Alertmanager IPs through respective
                                 DNS lookups. The port defaults to 9093 or the
                                 SRV record's value. The URL path is used as a
                                 prefix for the regular Alertmanager API path.
      --alertmanagers.send-timeout=10s  
                                 Timeout for sending alerts to alertmanager
      --alert.query-url=ALERT.QUERY-URL  
                                 The external Thanos Query URL that would be set
                                 in all alerts 'Source' field
      --objstore.config-file=<bucket.config-yaml-path>  
                                 Path to YAML file that contains object store
                                 configuration.
      --objstore.config=<bucket.config-yaml>  
                                 Alternative to 'objstore.config-file' flag.
                                 Object store configuration in YAML.
      --query=<query> ...        Addresses of statically configured query API
                                 servers (repeatable). The scheme may be
                                 prefixed with 'dns+' or 'dnssrv+' to detect
                                 query API servers through respective DNS
                                 lookups.
      --query.sd-files=<path> ...  
                                 Path to file that contain addresses of query
                                 peers. The path can be a glob pattern
                                 (repeatable).
      --query.sd-interval=5m     Refresh interval to re-read file SD files.
                                 (used as a fallback)
      --query.sd-dns-interval=30s  
                                 Interval between DNS resolutions.

```
